---
author: John
date: 2017-05-08 15:06:36+00:00
excerpt: '<p>We welcomed Ben, a Python programmer from Cambridge, who was on a working trip to West Yorkshire.</p><p><strong>Brian</strong> asked about notetaking apps because <a href="https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Tomboy" type="text/html">Tomboy</a> was no longer synchronising properly. He would prefer a web-based app and had looked at <a href="https://github.com/isaacs/minimatch" type="text/html">Minimatch</a> which uses NPM.</p><p>This provoked a discussion about developers dropping features.</p><p>Then, while David S led a private discussion at one end of the room,</p>
	'
layout: post
title: 'April 10 2017: Creating a Git Repository Meet'
categories:
- Past Meetings
---

<p>We welcomed Ben, a Python programmer from Cambridge, who was on a working trip to West Yorkshire.</p><p><strong>Brian</strong> asked about notetaking apps because <a href="https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Tomboy" type="text/html">Tomboy</a> was no longer synchronising properly. He would prefer a web-based app and had looked at <a href="https://github.com/isaacs/minimatch" type="text/html">Minimatch</a> which uses NPM.</p><p>This provoked a discussion about developers dropping features.</p><p>Then, while David S led a private discussion at one end of the room,</p><p><strong>Alice</strong> demonstrated creating a local Git repository for the BradLUG website. Though John had been able to create such a repository at the earlier meeting, now that all the website content had been added, his installation was now missing a lot of dependencies.</p><p>In order to make the Github implementation of Jekyll work on his machine, John had to install <code>ruby-devel</code>, <code>gcc</code>, <code>zlib</code>, <code>libxml</code> and <code>nodejs</code>. Then running as root</p><p><code>gem install bundle</code></p><p>installed everything else that was needed.</p><p>Next, John had to log in to Github and create a fork of the site, providing an SSH key for his fork.</p><p>Then, running as user on the local machine, he entered:</p><p><code>git clone git@github.com:john-hudson/bradlug.github.io.git<br>cd bradlug.github.io/<br>bundle.ruby2.1<br>bundle.ruby2.1 exec rake preview</code><p><p>to create the local repository and allow its contents to be viewed by entering <code>127.0.0.1:4000</code> in a browser.</p><p>Alice then helped John to modify the last meeting notes on the website to remove the surplus lines created during the transfer from the old site and create the report of the March meeting in 2017-03-19-march-13-2017-farewell-to-stephane-meet.markdown which can be used as a template for future posts. (As John had prepared the notes in HTML, it was noted that HTML in Markdown has to be continuous with no spaces or carriage returns.)</p><p>Thereafter, it was a matter of issuing the commands to add the March meeting notes to the local repository and then commit them to John’s Github repository before going online to merge them.</p><p><strong>Alice</strong> drew people’s attention to the <a href="http://leedsdigitalfestival.org/" type="text/html">Leeds Digital Festival</a> which is taking place between <time datetime="2017-04-22">April 22nd</time> and <time datetime="2017-04-29">April 29th</time>.</p>
