---
author: John
date: 2019-02-16 21:55:36+00:00
excerpt: '<p>The meeting began with a range of chit-chat. John H, commenting on a note about solution focused journalism, remarked that a very good journalist had told him that you always end a piece with something that left the reader thinking, not a neat solution. This led into a discussion of the principles of writing a good article and how, translated into radio, the principle that there should be a new point at least every 90 seconds was well worth following.</p>
	'
layout: post
title: 'February 12 2019 Journalism, CSS containers, Three funerals and a wedding, Docker containers, REMSCOPE, mysql_secure_installation Meet'
categories:
- Past Meetings
---

<p>The meeting began with a range of chit-chat. John H, commenting on a note about solution focused journalism, remarked that a very good journalist had told him that you always end a piece with something that left the reader thinking, not a neat solution. This led into a discussion of the principles of writing a good article and how, translated into radio, the principle that there should be a new point at least every 90 seconds was well worth following.</p><p>David S mentioned the recommendations of the Cairncross Review into the future of high-quality journalism in the UK to allow pay walls for local journalism and tax breaks which got a rather frosty reception. Tony mentioned that a lot of people are now surrendering their TV licences as they no longer watch TV or catch-up.</p><p><strong>John</strong> then shared how he had upgraded <a href="hhttps://johnrhudson.me.uk/" type="text/html" role="link">his website</a> by removing the Javascript that enabled it to work with older versions of Internet Explorer and brought in CSS containers.</p><p>Doing this involved adding a &lt;main&gt; element to hold the &lt;article&gt;, &lt;nav&gt; and &lt;aside&gt; elements and changing the CSS file to declare that the &lt;main&gt; element was a flex container with the &lt;article&gt;, &lt;nav&gt; and &lt;aside&gt; elements inside it and inserting the order in which each element should appear:</p><blockquote><code>main {display: flex;}<br>main>article {order: 2;  width: 58%; background-color: mintcream; padding: 1em;}<br>main>nav {order: 1; float: left; width: 18%; background-color: palegreen; border-right: medium solid darkgreen; border-bottom: medium solid darkgreen; border-left: medium solid darkgreen; padding: 1em;}<br>main>aside {order: 3; float: right; width: 18%; background-color: palegreen; border-right: medium solid darkgreen; border-bottom: medium solid darkgreen; border-left: medium solid darkgreen; padding: 1em;}</code></blockquote><p>David S pointed out that there was a thick border at the bottom of the &lt;nav&gt; and the &lt;aside&gt; elements which John later remedied by removing <code>border-bottom: medium solid darkgreen;</code> from the CSS file.</p><p>John was then able to demonstrate using the command line Lynx browser how putting the &lt;article&gt; element first in the &lt;main&gt; element means that screen readers will read the main text of the page before the links and additional material.</p><p>He added that, not long after doing this, someone had mentioned that his website had come top of a Google search and Tony commented that Google’s policy now is ‘mobile first.’</p><p>John then presented a <a href="http://bradlug.co.uk/blog/2019/02/12/files/Three_funerals.odp" type="application/vnd.oasis.opendocument.presentation">review</a> of his cousin’s book <cite>Three funerals and a wedding</cite> about his experiences of working in a variety of IT departments.</p><p><strong>Mike</strong> mentioned that he had been experimenting with Docker containers but found that, when something had to change, he had to download a fresh image which took ages.</p><p><strong>Bernard</strong> then demonstrated the webcam at the <a href="https://www.astronomycentre.org.uk/index.php/2-uncategorised/29-remscope" type="text/html" role="link">Remscope</a> for which he has used the <a href="https://opencv.org/" type="text/html" role="link">OpenCV</a> libraries.</p><p><strong>David C</strong> mentioned a problem he had had with the <code>mysql_secure_installation</code> script for which he had found an answer at <a href="https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-mysql-on-ubuntu-18-04" type="text/html" role="link">Digital Ocean</a>. [John later discovered that this problem only arises if the PAM plugin (introduced in 5.2) is configured; it appears that Debian/Ubuntu configures it and so needs the additional step described by Digital Ocean whereas other distros do not and so only need to run <code>mysql_secure_installation</code>.]</p><p>David went on to describe a problem with the <a href="https://www.broadcastradio.com/" type="text/html" role="link">Myriad</a> archives; backing up the system and archive files does not permit you to retrieve archived files using the archived system files; you have to rely on the source system files to retrieve any files archived on a different device.</p><p>Finally, he mentioned a problem a colleague was having installing Rivendell. A search suggested that the most up-to-date source for Rivendell might be <a href="http://www.radiotools.uk/index.html" type="text/html" role="link">Radio Tools</a>.</p>
